Since graduating from the Latvian Academy of Art with a Bachelor’s degree in painting, I have developed both a strong personal attachment to the practice of art, and set of skills that I can use to implement it. With that I’m still somewhat hesitant in using it. I’m still in search for something. A new medium, a new approach that I’d consider to be reliable enough for my practice to pay off. Western people for me are hard to talk to – they’re loud, overconfident and unaware of their drives and values beneath, which manifests as a constant reminder of general lack trustworthiness we all share. This is a predicament, and I’d like for my practice to know a way around it, to have qualities pure and truthful enough to bypass conscious acts of rebellion. For the most part, that is the something that I’m searching for. Maybe an appropriate epiphany hasn’t struck me yet, to not delve into things that restrict my output in such a way. Maybe I have a distorted rationale and/or senses, and my standards are actually poorly justified. Well, maybe I’ll see!
While I admit that I have, by far, been trying to keep some safe distance between myself and contemporary art world, I still believe that it provides a great value to the people around, and that it is ultimately irreplaceable. Surely this is not a radical view. I see fine art as a medium that fills in the gaps in our communication that the verbal languages just can’t reach. For me these gaps look big enough that I can’t imagine any kind of intimate understanding of one another to occur with them being void – without the cultivation of fine art. I’m therefore sure that I need to have sensible foundations for my works, conceptually and aesthetically, because the real, main result of an artwork should be reached within the mind of the viewer (or so I believe). This makes me reliant on my knowledge of the viewer – what does the viewer really need? What can I provide? I am aware of such limits when making my works, because I have no interest in fine art that does not primarily focus on it’s viewers, nor do I see any point in it. A question is then asked, “Well what about artists that do not care if their works are displayed? What if they make art to please themselves instead?”, which for me relates to a similar question – “Is talking to your self a form of communication, or is it a method of grasping you own mentality and rationale (apart from simply being an exercise one can perform)?”. I don’t suppose to have a generally satisfying answer to this, but I do at least think that the answer to the first question should correlate with the answer to the other.
With an audience in mind, I try to study all the different kinds of impressions people can get, that are parsed into a sort of library that I work with, by combining and recreating said impressions. They’re easy to gather for me. As for what I’d like for my works to communicate to viewers – I feel that simply evoking doubt in values people tend to seek comfort in might be more beneficial that creating a statement about them.
